building: add Windows quick start with ia32 (#162)
phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc: building/windows.md

# Windows

> It is possible to build Phoenix-rtos images for all targets and run `ia32-generic-qemu` on Windows using Cygwin or WSL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to build Phoenix-RTOS images for all supported targets and run the  `ia32-generic-qemu` on Windows using Cygwin or WSL.

```

## Cygwin

> In the beginning, we need to download and set the QEMU environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start, we need to download and set the QEMU environment.

```

> To do that we need to simply go to QEMU official website and select mirror which is targeted to our system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, go to official QEMU website and select mirror targeted  for your system.

```

* [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/download/#windows)

![OS bit selection](_images/qemu-os-select.png)

Next up we need to download Cygwin from the official website. It is a collection of Open Source tools that provide
functionality similar to a Linux distribution on Windows.

* [Cygwin](https://cygwin.com/install.html)

<details>
<summary>Cygwin installation/update process (click to expand)</summary>
&nbsp;

> * The installation process is in this case also a package manager. Cygwin will ask of type of installation in our case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The installation process also serves as a package manager. Cygwin will ask of type of installation in our case

```

it will be from internet

![cygwin-download-source](_images/cygwin-download-source.png)

* After that install process will ask about placement of root and local package directory

![cygwin-root-dir](_images/cygwin-root-dir.png)
![cygwin-local-directory](_images/cygwin-local-directory.png)

> * Cygwin have capability of using host internet connection, but it must be configured with our preferences (In most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Cygwin has capability of using host's internet connection, but it needs to be configured with our preferences (In most

```
I don't like my version of the sentence after "but", maybe you have a better idea

scenario it will be System Proxy Settings)

![cygwin-internet-connection](_images/cygwin-internet-connection.png)

> * Selection of mirror from where packages are taken is tricky, sometimes it needs to be changed to acquire

Reviewer: To acquire what?
```suggestion
* Selection of mirror for packages downloads can be tricky, sometimes it needs to be changed for better results .

```

![cygwin-mirror-selection](_images/cygwin-mirror-selection.png)

> * After selecting mirror we can easily select what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* After selecting a mirror we can select the

```

> packages we want. But in larger groups, this can be annoying that's why we only select two elements (They will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packages we want. But in larger groups, this can be annoying. That's why we only select two elements (They will be

```

installed with dependencies) which are mandatory to use package manager `apt-cyg` in Cygwin terminal.

> 

Reviewer: I would add a point about running the installation process
Something like:  Once these are chosen, proceed to run the installation process

![cygwin-selecting-packages](_images/cygwin-selecting-packages.png)

</details>
  &nbsp;

  <details>
<summary>Installing apt-cyg and mandatory packages (click to expand)</summary>

``` bash
lynx -source rawgit.com/transcode-open/apt-cyg/master/apt-cyg > apt-cyg && \
install apt-cyg /bin && \
apt-cyg install libhidapi-devel libgccpp1 libtool \
libusb-devel libvirt-client libvirt-devel \
mingw64-i686-gcc-core mingw64-i686-gcc-g++ \
mingw64-x86_64-gcc-core mingw64-x86_64-gcc-g++ \
gcc-core gcc-g++ libclang-devel nano vim \
patch picocom python3 python3-pip python3-sphinx \
python3-devel qemu-integration symlinks \
tty-clock usbutils virt-viewer make autoconf \

> automake cmake libc-client-devel git

Author: You encountered this problem because you miss part where is needed to rerun Cygwin installation for install dependencies.

> ```

Author: I must rewrite this sentence, but it means after that block you need to rerun Cygwin installation to download all mandatory dependencies. If i would add this in raw state there it will take to much space and time for end user because Cygwin installation will make translation above windows env without needing doing it manually.

  </details>
  &nbsp;

> After all of that, we need to run Cygwin installation because it will download all the needed dependencies without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all of that, we need to launch again Cygwin installation, as it will download all the needed dependencies without

```

> needing to do this manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the need for manual instalation.

```

> The next step is to prepare the genext2fs library and clone a repository. We need to make manually genext2fs library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to prepare the genext2fs library and clone the repository. We need to make manually genext2fs library,

```

because Cygwin doesn't support it, and it's mandatory in case of creating images for the ia32 system.

> To make it simply paste this into the Cygwin terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, paste the following into the Cygwin terminal:

```

<details>
<summary>Make genext2fs package and download phoenix-rtos (click to expand)</summary>

``` bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/bestouff/genext2fs &&\
cd genext2fs &&\
./autogen.sh &&\
./configure &&\
make &&\
make install &&\
make check &&\
cd &&\
rm -rf genext2fs apt-cyg &&\
git clone --recursive https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-project/
```

</details>
&nbsp;

> Now we can simply follow instructions about building toolchains remembering to use commands to build inside

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we can follow instructions about building toolchains remembering to use commands to build inside

```

> phoenix-rtos-project folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`phoenix-rtos-project` folder.

```

(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh riscv64-phoenix ~/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh sparc-phoenix ~/toolchains/sparc-phoenix)
```

Adding toolchains binaries to the PATH variable also can be tricky. On Windows, we move over folders with names
containing white spaces, after using:

``` bash
echo "export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/toolchains/i386-pc-phoenix/i386-pc-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/arm-phoenix/arm-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix/riscv64-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/sparc-phoenix/sparc-phoenix/bin/" >> $HOME/.bashrc
```

We need to fix paths e.g. `C:\x\y z\d` we must change to `C:\x\'y z'\d` simple change will fix all unwanted messages at
the start of the Cygwin terminal and will allow us to use the toolchain without setting the path every time.

To test is recommended to use this build command:

``` bash
TARGET=ia32-generic-qemu CONSOLE=serial phoenix-rtos-build/build.sh clean core fs image project test
```

And to run QEMU with this image we can use

``` plaintext
./scripts/ia32-generic-qemu-test.sh
```

## WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

> This part is only available for users with Windows 10 **(version 1709 and later)** and all versions of Windows 11

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This part is only available for users with Windows 10 **(version 1709 or later)** and all versions of Windows 11

```

> WSL is based on a Linux virtualization environment on a Windows environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WSL is based on a Linux virtualization environment within a Windows system.

```

> To properly install WSL is needed to allow **virtualization** in BIOS settings as default they are disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To properly install WSL is needed to enable **virtualization** in BIOS settings, as default they are disabled.

```

> WSL we can easily download using `winget` in PowerShell (Remember to run as administrator):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WSL we can download using `winget` in PowerShell (Remember to run it as an administrator):

```

```powershell
winget install wsl
```

> If `winget` is not available on platform simply just search for `App Installer` into Microsoft Store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `winget` is not available on your platform, simply search for `App Installer` in the Microsoft Store.

```

> After that we need to set up an environment in our case we aim for Ubuntu-22.04 to install it simply just use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, we need to set up an environment. In our case, we're aiming for `Ubuntu-22.04`. To install it, simply use:

```

```powershell
wsl --install -d Ubuntu-22.04
```

> WSL will install the subsystem and all needed components. After proper installation we can type in PowerShell `wsl` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WSL will install the subsystem and all needed components. After successful installation, we can type `wsl` in PowerShell, and

```

> the whole subsystem will start up (May take some time).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the entire subsystem will start up (This might take some time).

```

On the first start, you will be prompted to create an account in the subsystem (sudo credentials).

After that simply follow the instructions written in the [Building Phoenix-RTOS](README.md) and
[ia32-generic-qemu quick-start](../quickstart/ia32-generic-qemu.md).

(Quick tip: It is not mandatory but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up the toolchain

> building process and to build an image is recommended to use the same command as in Cygwin)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
building process)

```

libusb-devel libvirt-client libvirt-devel \
mingw64-i686-gcc-core mingw64-i686-gcc-g++ \
mingw64-x86_64-gcc-core mingw64-x86_64-gcc-g++ \
gcc-core gcc-g++ libclang-devel nano vim \
patch picocom python3 python3-pip python3-sphinx \
python3-devel qemu-integration symlinks \
tty-clock usbutils virt-viewer make autoconf \
automake cmake libc-client-devel git
```

  </details>
  &nbsp;

Before preforming next steps Cygwin needs to download all dependencies to packages that was installed.
Launch Cygwin installation again, in packages select section we can see tons of libraries were auto added to list.
All what we need is to execute this process.

The next step is to prepare the genext2fs library and clone the repository. We need to make manually genext2fs library,
because Cygwin doesn't support it, and it's mandatory in case of creating images for the ia32 system.

To do this, paste the following into the Cygwin terminal:

<details>
<summary>Make genext2fs package and download phoenix-rtos (click to expand)</summary>

``` bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/bestouff/genext2fs &&\
cd genext2fs &&\
./autogen.sh &&\
./configure &&\

> make &&\

Author: This is strictly taken from application README because configure recognize virtual system and must check up capability of creating this type of files. I tried without autogen but configure failed (Probably some Cygwin related problems). 
And about make as author of library says:
![image](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/49757239/b4ae4305-5769-4630-a0cb-d1c3810f4709)

``` bash
TARGET=ia32-generic-qemu CONSOLE=serial phoenix-rtos-build/build.sh clean core fs image project test
```

And to run QEMU with this image we can use

``` plaintext
./scripts/ia32-generic-qemu-test.sh
```

## WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

This part is only available for users with Windows 10 **(version 1709 or later)** and all versions of Windows 11

WSL is based on a Linux virtualization environment within a Windows system.
To properly install WSL is needed to enable **virtualization** in BIOS settings, as default they are disabled.

WSL we can download using `winget` in PowerShell (Remember to run it as an administrator):

```powershell
winget install wsl
```

If `winget` is not available on your platform, simply search for `App Installer` in the Microsoft Store.

After that, we need to set up an environment. In our case, we're aiming for `Ubuntu-22.04`.
To install it simply just use:

```powershell
wsl --install -d Ubuntu-22.04
```

WSL will install the subsystem and all needed components. After successful installation, we can type `wsl` in PowerShell
and the entire subsystem will start up (This might take some time).

> On the first start, you will be prompted to create an account in the subsystem (sudo credentials).

Author: With different distros can be different output, I will skip that

# Windows

For now, it is possible to build Phoenix-RTOS images for all targets and run `ia32-generic-qemu` on Windows using
`Cygwin` or `WSL`. Running the rest of targets is under development.

## Cygwin

To start, we need to download and set the QEMU environment.

To do this, go to the official [QEMU website](https://www.qemu.org/download/#windows) and select a mirror targeted
for your system.

> ![OS bit selection](_images/qemu-os-select.png)

Author: There is no additional configuration, all setup is based on typical installation.

> ![OS bit selection](_images/qemu-os-select.png)

Reviewer 2: Great, so please leave such note as suggested

> ![OS bit selection](_images/qemu-os-select.png)

Author: ![image](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/49757239/a09464d7-4d80-452b-a293-e2c837883a61)
It is on the right place

Next up we need to download `Cygwin` from the [official website](https://cygwin.com/install.html). It is a collection of
Open Source tools that provide

<details>
<summary>`Cygwin` installation/update process (click to expand)</summary>

> &nbsp;

Author: Using `<br>` in `.md` file is forbidden via `MD033` from `markdownlint` to create something similar I used `non-break space` 
Without: 
![image](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/49757239/35cb8ef1-76b3-466b-9442-2cbc04b221bc)
With:
![image](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/49757239/1c5fe44b-613d-4674-aa2b-069d7aa9139d)

> &nbsp;

Reviewer 2: Ok, I agree on that it looks better with the newline. Let's leave it :)

it will be from the internet.

![cygwin-download-source](_images/cygwin-download-source.png)

* After that, the installation process will ask about the placement of a root and local package directory

![cygwin-root-dir](_images/cygwin-root-dir.png)
![cygwin-local-directory](_images/cygwin-local-directory.png)

* `Cygwin` has the capability of using host's internet connection, but it needs to be configured with our preferences
(In most scenario it will be System Proxy Settings)

![cygwin-internet-connection](_images/cygwin-internet-connection.png)

* Selection of a mirror for package downloads can be tricky, sometimes it needs to be changed for better results because
not all mirror have all available packets.

![cygwin-mirror-selection](_images/cygwin-mirror-selection.png)

* After selecting the mirror we can select the packages we want. But in larger groups, this can be annoying. That's why
we only select two elements (They will be installed with dependencies) which are mandatory to use package manager
`apt-cyg` in `Cygwin` terminal.

![cygwin-selecting-packages](_images/cygwin-selecting-packages.png)

* Once these are chosen, proceed to run the installation process.

</details>

>   &nbsp;

Author: Yes for new line.

If installation process was performed, next step is to run `Cygwin` terminal.
Always run it as administrator, the best way to do that is simply setup this as default action:

![cygwin-admin-rights](_images/cygwin-admin-rights.png)

  <details>
<summary>Installing apt-cyg and mandatory packages (click to expand)</summary>

  &nbsp;
<details>

> <summary>Where place listed commands?</summary>

Author: Yes because sometimes Cygwin can map full directory path to home in example: `/cygdrive/c/cygwin64/home/user/` but home directory should be `/home/user/`

  After lunch `Cygwin` terminal just perform command:
  
  ```bash
  cd
  ```

  This will move you to default directory placed in `../cygwin64/home/admin/` on Windows.

  In `cygwin` terminal is pointed as `~` and it determinate you are in main directory. This will look like:

  ![cygwin-cmd-main-dir](_images/cygwin-cmd-main-dir.png)

</details>
  &nbsp;

``` bash
lynx -source rawgit.com/transcode-open/apt-cyg/master/apt-cyg > apt-cyg && \
install apt-cyg /bin && \
apt-cyg install libhidapi-devel libgccpp1 libtool \
libusb-devel libvirt-client libvirt-devel \
mingw64-i686-gcc-core mingw64-i686-gcc-g++ \
mingw64-x86_64-gcc-core mingw64-x86_64-gcc-g++ \
gcc-core gcc-g++ libclang-devel nano vim \
patch picocom python3 python3-pip python3-sphinx \
python3-devel qemu-integration symlinks \
tty-clock usbutils virt-viewer make autoconf \

> automake cmake libc-client-devel git

Reviewer: Perhaps it would be worth adding a line like 'Run this in the terminal' before the commands

Author: ```
<summary>Where place listed commands?</summary>
```
It is mentioned

```

  </details>
  &nbsp;

Before performing the next steps `Cygwin` needs to download all dependencies to the packages that were installed.
Launch `Cygwin` installation again, in the packages select section we can see tons of libraries were automatically added
to the list.
All that we need is to execute this process.

The next step is to prepare the `genext2fs` library and clone the repository. We need to make manually `genext2fs`
library, because `Cygwin` doesn't support it, and it's mandatory in case of creating images for the ia32 system.

To do this, paste the following into the `Cygwin` terminal:

<details>

> <summary>Make `genext2fs` package and download phoenix-rtos (click to expand)</summary>

Reviewer: ![image](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/116297248/8a04ff36-ee2c-4427-a660-f63acd01a5da)

``` bash
rm -rf genext2fs apt-cyg
```

</details>
&nbsp;

Now, we can follow instructions about building toolchains. Remember to use commands inside
`phoenix-rtos-project` folder.
(Quick tip: It is not mandatory but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up this process)

``` bash
 cd phoenix-rtos-project
```

``` bash
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh i386-pc-phoenix ~/toolchains/i386-pc-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh arm-phoenix ~/toolchains/arm-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh riscv64-phoenix ~/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh sparc-phoenix ~/toolchains/sparc-phoenix)

```

Adding toolchain binaries to the PATH variable also can be tricky. On Windows, we move over folders with names
containing white spaces, after using:

``` bash
echo "export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/toolchains/i386-pc-phoenix/i386-pc-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/arm-phoenix/arm-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix/riscv64-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/sparc-phoenix/sparc-phoenix/bin/" >> $HOME/.bashrc
```

> After calling this we need to fix paths in `.bashrc` file e.g. `C:\x\y z\d` we must change to `C:\x\'y z'\d`.

Author: Yes, but windows `program files` always contains space in it

This simple change will fix all unwanted messages at
the start of the `Cygwin` terminal, and it will allow us to use the toolchain without setting the path every time.

To test is recommended to use this build command:

``` bash
TARGET=ia32-generic-qemu CONSOLE=serial phoenix-rtos-build/build.sh clean core fs image project test
```

Of course, you can build the system image for this target in different configuration, for example by using the following
command

```bash
TARGET=ia32-generic-qemu phoenix-rtos-build/build.sh all

> ```

Reviewer: I think one option to test the building and a reference for more information about the build process would be enough

* Form more information about building follow: [Building script](../building/script.md)

In case of performing all steps right build will show the following output:
![Cygwin build](_images/cygwin-ia32-build.png)

> And to run QEMU with this image simply use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And to run QEMU with this image use:

```

``` plaintext
./scripts/ia32-generic-qemu-test.sh
```

Then you can follow instructions from
[ia32-generic-qemu quick-start](../quickstart/ia32-generic-qemu.md).

## WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

This part is only available for users with Windows 10 **(version 1709 or later)** and all versions of Windows 11

`WSL` is based on a Linux virtualization environment within a Windows system.
To properly install `WSL` is needed to enable **virtualization** in BIOS settings, as default they are disabled.

`WSL` we can download using `winget` in PowerShell (Remember to run it as an administrator):

```powershell
winget install wsl
```

> If `winget` is not available on your platform, simply search for `App Installer` in the Microsoft Store.
> 
> After that, we need to set up an environment. In our case, we're aiming for `Ubuntu-22.04`.
> To install it simply just use:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `winget` is not available on your system, search for the `App Installer` in the Microsoft Store.

After that, we'll need to set up an environment. In our case, we're aiming for `Ubuntu-22.04`.
To install it, use the following command:

```

</details>

The next step is installing the packages required for launching Phoenix-RTOS. It can be done using the following
command:

``` bash
lynx -source rawgit.com/transcode-open/apt-cyg/master/apt-cyg > apt-cyg && \
install apt-cyg /bin && \
apt-cyg install libhidapi-devel libgccpp1 libtool \
libusb-devel libvirt-client libvirt-devel \
mingw64-i686-gcc-core mingw64-i686-gcc-g++ \
mingw64-x86_64-gcc-core mingw64-x86_64-gcc-g++ \
gcc-core gcc-g++ libclang-devel nano vim \
patch picocom python3 python3-pip python3-sphinx \
python3-devel qemu-integration symlinks \
tty-clock usbutils virt-viewer make autoconf \
automake cmake libc-client-devel git
```

<details>
<summary>How to move to the home directory</summary>

  After lunch `Cygwin` terminal just perform command:
  
  ```bash
  cd
  ```

  This will move you to default directory placed in `../cygwin64/home/admin/` on Windows.

  In `cygwin` terminal is pointed as `~` and it determinate you are in home directory. This will look like:

  ![cygwin-cmd-home-dir](_images/cygwin-cmd-home-dir.png)

</details>
  &nbsp;

Before performing the next steps `Cygwin` needs to download all dependencies to the packages that were installed.

> Launch `Cygwin` installation again and now in the package's section we can see tons of libraries that were automatically

Author: ![image](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/49757239/a5d18d0f-19bb-4517-97b5-6b21432c5197)

> Launch `Cygwin` installation again and now in the package's section we can see tons of libraries that were automatically

Reviewer 2: From what I understand the section you mentioned is called `packages`, so I'd leave the suggested version.

(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh arm-phoenix ~/toolchains/arm-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh riscv64-phoenix ~/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh sparc-phoenix ~/toolchains/sparc-phoenix)

```

Adding toolchain binaries to the PATH variable also can be tricky. On Windows, we move over folders with names
containing white spaces, after using:

``` bash
echo "export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/toolchains/i386-pc-phoenix/i386-pc-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/arm-phoenix/arm-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix/riscv64-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/sparc-phoenix/sparc-phoenix/bin/" >> $HOME/.bashrc
```

After calling this we need to fix paths in `.bashrc` file e.g. `C:\x\y z\d` we must change to `C:\x\'y z'\d`.

This simple change will fix all unwanted messages at
the start of the `Cygwin` terminal, and it will allow us to use the toolchain without setting the path every time.

Now it should be possible to build the Phoenix-RTOS system image with the full configuration excluding tests:

```bash
TARGET=ia32-generic-qemu CONSOLE=serial phoenix-rtos-build/build.sh all
```

> Of course, you can build the system image for this target in different configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, you can build the system image for this target in different configuration. More information [here](../building/script.md).

```

# Windows

For now, it is possible to build Phoenix-RTOS images for all targets and run `ia32-generic-qemu` on Windows using
`Cygwin` or `WSL`. Running the rest of targets is under development.

## Cygwin

To start, we need to download and install the QEMU environment on Windows. It's important to do it first to avoid issues
with the `qemu-integration` tool.

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's hide those instructions, it may be obvious for some people.
```suggestion

<details>
<summary> How to install QEMU on Windows (click to expand)</summary>
</details>
```

![cygwin-internet-connection](_images/cygwin-internet-connection.png)

* Selection of a mirror for package downloads can be tricky, sometimes it needs to be changed for better results because
not all mirrors have all available packets. That's why it's recommended to install only the necessary ones at first as
it is done in the next instructions.

![cygwin-mirror-selection](_images/cygwin-mirror-selection.png)

* After selecting the mirror, we can select the packages we want. For now only `lynx` and `wget` should be chosen (they
will be installed with required dependencies). Those tools are mandatory to use package manager
`apt-cyg` and install the rest of required packages in Cygwin terminal (explained further).
* Note that `Install` will be printed instead of `Reinstall` in case that you are executing the installation for a first
time.

![cygwin-selecting-packages](_images/cygwin-selecting-packages.png)

* Once these are chosen, proceed to run the installation process.

</details>
  &nbsp;

The next step is to run `Cygwin` terminal.
Always run it as administrator, the best way to do that is simply setup this as default action:

<details>

> <summary>How to run Cygwin as administrator by default (click to expand)</summary>

Reviewer 2: I would look better with a newline as in the other places.

![Screenshot from 2023-11-10 11-44-39](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/77304431/daebe225-4584-431c-986d-b65fe0c65f60)

```suggestion
<summary>How to run Cygwin as administrator by default (click to expand)</summary>
&nbsp;
```

> Right-click on the `Cygwin64Terminal` icon, then go to Properties ⇾ Compatibility ⇾ Settings and choose `Run this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Right-click on the `Cygwin64Terminal` icon, then go to `Properties` ⇾ `Compatibility` ⇾ `Settings` and choose `Run this

```

program as an administrator`

</details>
&nbsp;

After launching the terminal, it may happen that working directory is wrong. It can be corrected by moving to the home
directory.

<details>

> <summary margin-left: 2em>Show more about changing directories in Cygwin</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<summary margin-left: 2em>Show more about changing directories in Cygwin.</summary>

```

gcc-core gcc-g++ libclang-devel nano vim \
patch picocom python3 python3-pip python3-sphinx \
python3-devel qemu-integration symlinks \
tty-clock usbutils virt-viewer make autoconf \
automake cmake libc-client-devel git
```

&nbsp;

Before performing the next steps `Cygwin` needs to download all dependencies to the packages that were installed.
Launch `Cygwin` installation again and now in the package's section we can see tons of libraries that were automatically
added to the list.
All that we need is to execute the installing process.

The next step is to prepare the `genext2fs` library and clone the repository. We need to make manually `genext2fs`
library, because `Cygwin` doesn't support it, and it's mandatory in case of creating images for the ia32 system.

To do this, paste the following into the `Cygwin` terminal:

<details>
<summary>Make genext2fs package and download phoenix-rtos (click to expand)</summary>

``` bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/bestouff/genext2fs &&\
cd genext2fs &&\
./autogen.sh &&\
./configure &&\
make &&\
make install &&\
make check &&\
cd .. &&\
rm -rf genext2fs apt-cyg
```

</details>
&nbsp;

> Finally, all elements needed to run ia32-generic-qemu are on place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, all external tools are on place.

```

Now what was left is to copy repository with all submodules.

> To do that use this command into home directory:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do that call this command in home directory:

```

``` bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-project/
```

Now, we can follow instructions about building toolchains. Remember to use commands inside
`phoenix-rtos-project` folder.

(Quick tip: It is not mandatory but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up this process)

``` bash
 cd phoenix-rtos-project
```

``` bash
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh i386-pc-phoenix ~/toolchains/i386-pc-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh arm-phoenix ~/toolchains/arm-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh riscv64-phoenix ~/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh sparc-phoenix ~/toolchains/sparc-phoenix)

```

> Adding toolchain binaries to the PATH variable also can be tricky. On Windows, we move over folders with names

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding toolchain binaries to the PATH variable can also be tricky. On Windows, we move over folders with names

```

containing white spaces, after using:

``` bash
echo "export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/toolchains/i386-pc-phoenix/i386-pc-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/arm-phoenix/arm-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix/riscv64-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/sparc-phoenix/sparc-phoenix/bin/" >> $HOME/.bashrc
```

After calling this we need to fix paths in `.bashrc` file e.g. `C:\x\y z\d` we must change to `C:\x\'y z'\d`.

This simple change will fix all unwanted messages at
the start of the `Cygwin` terminal, and it will allow us to use the toolchain without setting the path every time.

Now it should be possible to build the Phoenix-RTOS system image with the full configuration excluding tests:

```bash
TARGET=ia32-generic-qemu CONSOLE=serial phoenix-rtos-build/build.sh all
```

Of course, you can build the system image for this target in different configuration.
More information [here](../building/script.md).

In case of performing all steps right, the statement about successful build will be printed. The kernel and disk images
will be available in the `_boot` directory then.

Then you can follow instructions from
[ia32-generic-qemu quick-start](../quickstart/ia32-generic-qemu.md).

> * Note that QEMU is already installed, so this step may be skipped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Note that QEMU is already installed, so this step should be skipped.

```

## WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

This part is only available for users with Windows 10 **(version 1709 or later)** and all versions of Windows 11

`WSL` is based on a Linux virtualization environment within a Windows system.
To properly install `WSL` it's needed to enable **virtualization** in BIOS settings as by default it's disabled.

`WSL` we can download using `winget` in PowerShell (Remember to run it as an administrator):

```powershell
winget install wsl
```

If `winget` is not available on your system, search for the `App Installer` in the Microsoft Store.

After that, we'll need to set up an environment. In our case, we're aiming for `Ubuntu-22.04`.
To install it, use the following command:

```powershell
wsl --install -d Ubuntu-22.04
```

`WSL` will install the subsystem and all needed components. After successful installation, we can type

```powershell
wsl
```

In PowerShell and the entire subsystem will start up (This might take some time).
On the first start, you will be prompted to create an account in the subsystem (sudo credentials).

![Sudo Credentials](_images/wsl-sudo-credentials.png)

> After that simply follow the instructions written in the [Building Phoenix-RTOS](README.md) and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After that simply follow the instructions for Ubuntu written in the [Building Phoenix-RTOS](README.md) and

```

[ia32-generic-qemu quick-start](../quickstart/ia32-generic-qemu.md).

> (Quick tip: It is not mandatory but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up the toolchain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(Quick tip: It is not mandatory, but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up the toolchain

```

building process)

### See also

> 1. [Building Phoenix-RTOS image](README.md)

Reviewer 2: I think that it would be also good to place there link to ia32-generic quickstart.
